.TH CLIBX_PRINT 3 "May 2026" "clibx" "clibx print Reference"
.SH NAME
clibx_print \- lightweight printf implementation using direct Linux syscalls
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <clibx_print.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clibx_print
is a completely standalone, optional module providing a minimal printf-style
output implementation using direct Linux x86_64 syscalls. It has no dependencies
on libc's stdio, making it useful for minimal environments or educational purposes.
.SP
This module is independent and can be used without clibx.h.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.B void clibx_printf(const char *fmt, ...)
Printf-style output to stdout (file descriptor 1).
Supports format specifiers listed in the SUPPORTED SPECIFIERS section.
Returns void. Write failures are not reported to the caller; silent failures occur on syscall errors.
.TP
.B void clibx_fprintf(int fd, const char *fmt, ...)
Printf-style output to an arbitrary file descriptor.
Accepts the same format specifiers as clibx_printf.
Returns void. Write failures are not reported to the caller; silent failures occur on syscall errors.
.SH SUPPORTED SPECIFIERS
.TS
allbox tab(:);
c | c | l
l | l | l
.
Specifier:Type:Example
%d, %i:Signed decimal:clibx_printf("%d\\n", -42);
%u:Unsigned decimal:clibx_printf("%u\\n", 42);
%o:Octal:clibx_printf("%o\\n", 82);
%x:Hex lowercase:clibx_printf("%x\\n", 255);
%X:Hex uppercase:clibx_printf("%X\\n", 255);
%p:Pointer (0x prefix):clibx_printf("%p\\n", ptr);
%s:String:clibx_printf("%s\\n", "hello");
%c:Character:clibx_printf("%c\\n", 'A');
%%:Literal percent:clibx_printf("100%%\\n");
.TE
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#include <clibx_print.h>

int main(void) {
    clibx_printf("Hello, %s!\\n", "World");
    clibx_printf("Age: %d, Score: %u\\n", 30, 100);
    clibx_printf("Hex: 0x%x, Octal: %o\\n", 255, 82);
    
    int arr[] = {1, 2, 3};
    clibx_printf("Array at: %p\\n", (void*)arr);
    
    clibx_fprintf(2, "Error: %s (code: %d)\\n", 
                  "Something failed", 404);
    
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH COMPILATION
Link with no additional libraries:
.nf
gcc myprogram.c -o myprogram
.fi
.SH PLATFORM REQUIREMENTS
.TP
.B Architecture
x86_64 (Intel/AMD 64-bit)
.TP
.B Operating System
Linux with syscall support
.TP
.B Kernel
Standard Linux kernel with write(2) syscall
.SH LIMITATIONS
.TP
.B No Floating Point
%f, %F, %e, %E, %g, %G specifiers are not supported.
Floating-point formatting would require significant code overhead.
.TP
.B No Width/Precision
Modifiers like ., -, 0 (padding), width specifiers are not implemented.
Formatting is straightforward: types are printed with default representation.
.TP
.B No %n Specifier
The %n specifier (write count) is not supported for security reasons.
.TP
.B Basic %p Implementation
Pointers are printed in lowercase hex with 0x prefix.
.TP
.B NULL String Handling (%s)
When %s is used with a NULL pointer, no output is produced (unlike standard printf which prints "(null)").
Caller should ensure non-NULL strings are passed.
.SH WHY USE CLIBX_PRINT?
.TP
.B Minimal Dependencies
Zero dependency on libc's stdio. Perfect for freestanding environments.
.TP
.B Direct Syscalls
Uses Linux write(2) directly via inline assembly.
No buffering, each call writes immediately to the file descriptor.
.TP
.B Educational Value
Useful for learning about syscall-level I/O in C.
.TP
.B Small Footprint
Extremely lightweight, suitable for embedded or minimal programs.
.TP
.B Independent Module
Can be used standalone without clibx.h or other dependencies.
.SH IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
.TP
.B Linux write() Syscall
Uses inline x86_64 assembly with the System V AMD64 ABI:
.RS
.nf
mov $1, %%rax          /* Syscall number for write(2) */
syscall                /* Invoke syscall */
.fi
.RE
Register mapping: rdi = fd, rsi = buf, rdx = count. Return value in rax (bytes written or error code).
.TP
.B No Buffering
Each call to clibx_printf or clibx_fprintf immediately invokes write(2).
No internal buffer is maintained. Each format specifier results in one or more syscalls.
.TP
.B Error Handling
The public API does not expose syscall return values. Write failures are silent.
If write(2) returns an error code (negative value), it is not reported or handled.
Caller cannot detect write failures or partial writes.
Passed file descriptors are not validated; invalid fds cause silent write failures.
.SH EXAMPLE: USING WITH STDERR
.nf
#include <clibx_print.h>

int main(void) {
    clibx_fprintf(1, "Normal output\\n");      /* stdout */
    clibx_fprintf(2, "Error message\\n");      /* stderr */
    
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH EXAMPLE: MINIMAL PROGRAM (NO LIBC STDIO)
.nf
#define _GNU_SOURCE
#include <clibx_print.h>

int main(void) {
    clibx_printf("Hello from syscalls!\\n");
    clibx_printf("Numbers: %d, %u, 0x%x\\n", -1, 42, 255);
    return 0;
}

/* Compile with minimal libc:
   gcc -nostdlib minimal.c -o minimal \\
       /lib64/crt1.o /lib64/crti.o /lib64/crtn.o \\
       -lc -dynamic-linker /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so*
 */
.fi
.SH COMPARISON WITH STANDARD PRINTF
.TS
allbox tab(:);
l | l | l
l | l | l
.
Feature:clibx_printf:printf
Dependency:None (syscalls):libc stdio
Floating point:%f not supported:%f supported
Width/precision:Not supported:Supported
Buffering:None:Buffered
Size:Very small:Larger
Use cases:Minimal/embedded:General purpose
.TE
.SH NOTES
.TP
.B When to Use
Use clibx_printf when you specifically need direct syscall output
without stdio buffering or libc overhead. For most applications,
standard printf is more appropriate and feature-complete.
.TP
.B When NOT to Use
Do not use for production code requiring error handling or reliability.
As write failures are silent, this is unsuitable for applications that need to detect I/O errors.
Standard printf or other I/O libraries are recommended for robust I/O.
.TP
.B File Descriptors
Standard file descriptors: 0 = stdin, 1 = stdout, 2 = stderr.
You can write to any open file descriptor (must be already open).
Invalid or closed file descriptors result in silent failures.
.TP
.B Unicode/Multibyte
No special handling of UTF-8 or multibyte characters.
Bytes are written directly to the file descriptor.
.TP
.B Performance
Syscall overhead per format specifier may be significant for high-frequency logging.
Consider buffering or batching output for performance-critical code.
.TP
.B Format Specifier Parsing
Format string is parsed linearly. Invalid format specifiers are printed literally.
Example: clibx_printf("%q\\n") will print "%q" to output.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clibx (3),
.BR clibx_list (3),
.BR write (2),
.BR printf (3)
.SH AUTHOR
David Balishyan <davidbalishyan12@gmail.com>
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project repository.
.SH LICENSE
See LICENSE file in the project root.
