.TH CLIBX_LIST 3 "May 2026" "clibx" "clibx Linked List Reference"
.SH NAME
clibx_list \- generic singly-linked list implementation
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <clibx_list.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clibx_list
is a generic, type-agnostic singly-linked list implementation. It uses void
pointers to store arbitrary data of any type, making it suitable for storing
integers, strings, structs, or any other data type.
.SP
The list maintains both head and tail pointers for efficient O(1) append operations.
.SH DATA TYPES
.TP
.B clibx_node
A single node in the linked list.
.RS
.nf
typedef struct clibx_node {
    void *data;                /* Pointer to user data */
    struct clibx_node *next;   /* Next node in list */
} clibx_node;
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B clibx_list
The linked list container.
.RS
.nf
typedef struct {
    clibx_node *head;          /* First node */
    clibx_node *tail;          /* Last node (for O(1) append) */
    size_t count;              /* Number of elements */
} clibx_list;
.fi
.RE
.SH FUNCTIONS
.SS Initialization
.TP
.B clibx_list list_init(void)
Initialize an empty linked list.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.SS Insertion
.TP
.B void list_push_back(clibx_list *list, void *data)
Append data to the end of the list.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void list_push_front(clibx_list *list, void *data)
Prepend data to the beginning of the list.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.SS Access
.TP
.B void* list_get(clibx_list *list, size_t index)
Get data at a specific 0-based index.
Returns NULL if index is out of bounds.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void* list_front(clibx_list *list)
Get data at the front of the list.
Returns NULL if list is empty.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void* list_back(clibx_list *list)
Get data at the back of the list.
Returns NULL if list is empty.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.SS Search
.TP
.B int list_contains(clibx_list *list, void *value, int (*cmp)(void*, void*))
Check if a value exists using the provided comparison function.
The comparison function should return 1 if values are equal, 0 otherwise.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.SS Removal
.TP
.B void* list_pop_front(clibx_list *list)
Remove and return the first element.
Caller is responsible for freeing the returned data.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void* list_remove_at(clibx_list *list, size_t index)
Remove and return the element at the specified index.
Caller is responsible for freeing the returned data.
Returns NULL if index is out of bounds.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void list_remove_all(clibx_list *list, int free_data)
Remove all nodes from the list. 
If free_data is non-zero, also calls free() on each node's data.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.SS Query
.TP
.B int list_is_empty(clibx_list *list)
Check if the list is empty.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B size_t list_size(clibx_list *list)
Get the number of elements in the list.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.SS Memory Management
.TP
.B void list_free(clibx_list *list, int free_data)
Free all memory used by the list.
If free_data is non-zero, also calls free() on each node's data.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.SS Printing (Utility)
.TP
.B void list_print_int(clibx_list *list)
Print all integers in the list in [a, b, c] format to stdout.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void list_print_str(clibx_list *list)
Print all strings in the list in ["a", "b", "c"] format to stdout.
Time complexity: O(n * m) where m is average string length. Space complexity: O(1).
.SH MACROS
.TP
.B LIST_FOR_EACH(node, list)
Iterate over all nodes in the list.
.RS
.nf
clibx_node *node;
LIST_FOR_EACH(node, &list) {
    printf("%d\n", *(int*)node->data);
}
.fi
.RE
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#include <clibx_list.h>

int main(void) {
    clibx_list list = list_init();

    /* Add integers */
    int *a = NEW(int); *a = 10;
    int *b = NEW(int); *b = 20;
    int *c = NEW(int); *c = 30;

    list_push_back(&list, a);
    list_push_back(&list, b);
    list_push_back(&list, c);

    /* Print list */
    printf("List: ");
    list_print_int(&list);  /* Output: [10, 20, 30] */

    /* Access front/back */
    printf("Front: %d\\n", *(int*)list_front(&list));  /* 10 */
    printf("Back: %d\\n", *(int*)list_back(&list));    /* 30 */

    /* Iterate */
    clibx_node *node;
    LIST_FOR_EACH(node, &list) {
        printf("Value: %d\\n", *(int*)node->data);
    }

    /* Pop and remove */
    void *removed = list_pop_front(&list);
    if (removed) {
        printf("Removed: %d\\n", *(int*)removed);
        free(removed);
    }

    /* Clean up */
    list_free(&list, 1);  /* Free list and all data */

    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH ITERATING WITH CUSTOM TYPES
.nf
typedef struct {
    int id;
    char name[50];
} Person;

int main(void) {
    clibx_list people = list_init();

    Person *alice = NEW(Person);
    alice->id = 1;
    strcpy(alice->name, "Alice");
    list_push_back(&people, alice);

    /* Iterate */
    clibx_node *node;
    LIST_FOR_EACH(node, &people) {
        Person *p = (Person*)node->data;
        printf("ID: %d, Name: %s\\n", p->id, p->name);
    }

    list_free(&people, 1);
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH SEARCHING WITH CUSTOM COMPARATORS
.nf
int int_cmp(void *a, void *b) {
    return *(int*)a == *(int*)b;
}

int main(void) {
    clibx_list list = list_init();

    int *val1 = NEW(int); *val1 = 42;
    int *val2 = NEW(int); *val2 = 99;
    list_push_back(&list, val1);
    list_push_back(&list, val2);

    int target = 42;
    if (list_contains(&list, &target, int_cmp)) {
        printf("Found 42 in list\\n");
    }

    list_free(&list, 1);
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH TIME COMPLEXITY
.TS
allbox tab(:);
c | c | c
l | c | l
.
Operation:Complexity:Notes
list_init:O(1):Constant time
list_push_back:O(1):Amortized constant with tail pointer
list_push_front:O(1):Prepend to head
list_pop_front:O(1):Remove from head
list_get:O(n):Requires traversal to index
list_remove_at:O(n):Requires traversal to index
list_contains:O(n):Full search in worst case
list_free:O(n):Must traverse entire list
list_is_empty:O(1):Check count
list_size:O(1):Check count
.TE
.SH NOTES
.TP
.B Memory Management
The list does not automatically manage the lifetime of user data.
Callers must ensure proper cleanup:
.RS
.IP -
Use list_free(&list, 1) to free both nodes and data
.IP -
Use list_free(&list, 0) to free only nodes (data freed separately)
.IP -
When removing elements with list_pop_front() or list_remove_at(),
the caller becomes responsible for freeing the returned data
.RE
.TP
.B Type Safety
Since the list uses void pointers, there is no compile-time type checking.
Ensure consistent data types are stored and retrieved from a single list.
Cast carefully when retrieving data.
.TP
.B Generic Usage
The list works with any data type: primitives, strings, structs, or pointers.
Simply cast to the appropriate type when accessing data.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clibx (3),
.BR clibx_print (3)
.SH AUTHOR
David Balishyan <davidbalishyan12@gmail.com>
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project repository.
.SH LICENSE
See LICENSE file in the project root.
