.TH CLIBX 3 "May 2026" "clibx" "clibx Library Reference"
.SH NAME
clibx \- minimal C utility library for common programming patterns
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B #include <clibx.h>
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clibx
is a lightweight, header-only C utility library providing common macros and
helper functions to simplify everyday C development tasks. It requires only
the C standard library and is designed with zero external dependencies.
.SH FEATURES
.TP
.B Array Operations
\- ARRAY_SIZE, print_int_array, print_double_array, print_char_array
.TP
.B Math Macros
\- MIN, MAX, CLAMP, ABS, LERP, IS_POWER_OF_2, NEXT_POWER_OF_2
.TP
.B Math Functions
\- clibx_log2, clibx_pow, clibx_ceil, clibx_floor, clibx_round
.TP
.B Bitwise Operations
\- BIT, SET_BIT, CLEAR_BIT, TOGGLE_BIT, CHECK_BIT
.TP
.B Memory Utilities
\- NEW, NEW_ARRAY, NEW_ZEROED, FREE, SWAP
.TP
.B String Operations
\- STREQ, STR_EMPTY, STR_STARTS_WITH, STR_CONTAINS
\- strtrim, strsplit, strjoin, str_to_lower, str_to_upper
.TP
.B Dynamic Vector
\- str_vec with vec_init, vec_push, vec_free
.TP
.B Path Utilities
\- path_basename, path_dirname, path_extension, path_join
\- path_exists, path_is_dir, path_is_file, path_file_size
.TP
.B Hash Map
\- String-to-string hash map with DJB2 hashing
\- hashmap_init, hashmap_hash, hashmap_put, hashmap_get, hashmap_contains, hashmap_free
.TP
.B Logging & Error Handling
\- LOG, ERROR, ASSERT, UNIMPLEMENTED, UNREACHABLE
.TP
.B Type Introspection
\- TYPE_STR, TYPE_NAME, TYPE_FUNC, PRINT
.TP
.B Compiler Hints (GCC/Clang)
\- LIKELY, UNLIKELY, UNUSED, DEPRECATED, NODISCARD, SWAP
.TP
.B Loop Helpers
\- FOR, FOR_RANGE
.SH DATA TYPES
.TP
.B str
String type alias for char*
.TP
.B str_vec
Dynamic string vector
.RS
.nf
typedef struct {
    str *data;
    size_t length;
    size_t capacity;
} str_vec;
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B clibx_hashmap
String-to-string hash map
.RS
.nf
typedef struct {
    clibx_hashmap_entry **buckets;
    size_t capacity;
    size_t count;
} clibx_hashmap;
.fi
.RE
.SH MEMORY MANAGEMENT
All memory functions are convenience wrappers around malloc/calloc/free:
.TP
.B NEW(type)
Allocate memory for a single object. Returns `NULL` if allocation fails.
.TP
.B NEW_ARRAY(type, count)
Allocate array of given type and count. Returns `NULL` if allocation fails.
.TP
.B NEW_ZEROED(type)
Allocate and zero-initialize a single object. Returns `NULL` if allocation fails.
.TP
.B FREE(ptr)
Free memory and set pointer to NULL (prevents dangling pointers).
.SH MATH FUNCTIONS
.TP
.B double clibx_log2(double x)
Compute the base-2 logarithm of x. Returns NaN if x <= 0.
Time complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B double clibx_pow(double base, double exp)
Compute base raised to the power of exp. Only supports integer exponents.
Returns NaN for fractional exponents.
Time complexity: O(log exp).
.TP
.B double clibx_ceil(double x)
Return the smallest integer greater than or equal to x.
Time complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B double clibx_floor(double x)
Return the largest integer less than or equal to x.
Time complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B double clibx_round(double x)
Round x to the nearest integer.
Time complexity: O(1).
.SH HASH MAP FUNCTIONS
.TP
.B unsigned long hashmap_hash(str key)
Compute the DJB2 hash of a string key. This is the internal hash function used by the hash map.
Time complexity: O(n) where n is the key length.
.TP
.B clibx_hashmap hashmap_init(void)
Create a new empty hashmap with default capacity (64).
Time complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void hashmap_put(clibx_hashmap *map, str key, str value)
Insert or update a key-value pair in the hash map.
Time complexity: O(n) where n is the key length (amortized O(1)).
.TP
.B str hashmap_get(clibx_hashmap *map, str key)
Get value by key. Returns NULL if not found.
Time complexity: O(n) where n is the key length (amortized O(1)).
.TP
.B clibx_bool hashmap_contains(clibx_hashmap *map, str key)
Check if a key exists in the hash map.
Time complexity: O(n) where n is the key length (amortized O(1)).
.TP
.B void hashmap_free(clibx_hashmap *map)
Free all memory used by the hash map.
Time complexity: O(m + n) where m is capacity and n is number of entries.
.SH ARRAY OPERATIONS
.TP
.B size_t ARRAY_SIZE(arr)
Macro that computes the number of elements in a static array.
Only works for compile-time stack-allocated arrays, not pointers.
Time complexity: O(1) at compile time.
.TP
.B void print_int_array(const int *arr, size_t len)
Print an integer array in [a, b, c] format to stdout.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void print_double_array(const double *arr, size_t len)
Print a floating-point array in [a, b, c] format to stdout.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void print_char_array(const char *arr, size_t len)
Print a character array in ['a', 'b', 'c'] format to stdout.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(1).
.SH BITWISE OPERATIONS
.TP
.B unsigned long long BIT(x)
Macro that returns a 64-bit integer with the x-th bit set to 1.
.TP
.B void SET_BIT(val, pos)
Macro that sets the bit at position pos in val.
Modifies val in-place.
.TP
.B void CLEAR_BIT(val, pos)
Macro that clears the bit at position pos in val.
Modifies val in-place.
.TP
.B void TOGGLE_BIT(val, pos)
Macro that toggles the bit at position pos in val.
Modifies val in-place.
.TP
.B int CHECK_BIT(val, pos)
Macro that returns non-zero if bit at position pos is set, zero otherwise.
.SH STRING OPERATIONS
.TP
.B int STREQ(a, b)
Macro that compares two strings for equality using strcmp.
Returns non-zero if equal, zero otherwise.
.TP
.B int STR_EMPTY(s)
Macro that checks if string s is empty (first character is '\0').
Returns non-zero if empty, zero otherwise.
.TP
.B int STR_STARTS_WITH(s, prefix)
Macro that checks if string s starts with the given prefix.
Returns non-zero if true, zero otherwise.
.TP
.B int STR_CONTAINS(haystack, needle)
Macro that checks if haystack contains needle as a substring.
Returns non-zero if found, zero otherwise.
.TP
.B str strtrim(str s)
Trim leading and trailing whitespace from a string.
Returns a newly allocated string. Caller must free the result.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(n).
.TP
.B str_vec strsplit(str input, char delim)
Split a string by delimiter into a string vector.
Returns a str_vec containing the parts. Caller must free both the vector and individual strings.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(k) where k is number of parts.
.TP
.B str strjoin(str *arr, size_t len, str sep)
Join an array of strings with a separator.
Returns a newly allocated string. Caller must free the result.
Time complexity: O(n). Space complexity: O(n).
.TP
.B str str_to_lower(str s)
Convert string to lowercase in-place.
Returns the same pointer s.
Time complexity: O(n).
.TP
.B str str_to_upper(str s)
Convert string to uppercase in-place.
Returns the same pointer s.
Time complexity: O(n).
.SH DYNAMIC VECTOR
.TP
.B str_vec vec_init(void)
Initialize an empty string vector.
Time complexity: O(1). Space complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B void vec_push(str_vec *vec, str value)
Append a string to the vector. Grows capacity dynamically.
Time complexity: O(1) amortized. Space complexity: O(1) amortized.
.TP
.B void vec_free(str_vec *vec)
Free the vector's internal data. Does NOT free individual strings.
Time complexity: O(1).
.SH PATH UTILITIES
.TP
.B str path_basename(str path)
Extract the filename component from a path.
Returns a newly allocated string. Caller must free.
Example: "/usr/bin/foo" -> "foo"
Time complexity: O(n).
.TP
.B str path_dirname(str path)
Extract the directory component from a path.
Returns a newly allocated string. Caller must free.
Example: "/usr/bin/foo" -> "/usr/bin"
Time complexity: O(n).
.TP
.B str path_extension(str path)
Extract the file extension (without dot) from a path.
Returns a newly allocated string (empty if no extension). Caller must free.
Example: "file.txt" -> "txt"
Time complexity: O(n).
.TP
.B str path_join(str a, str b)
Join two path components with '/'.
Returns a newly allocated string. Caller must free.
Example: path_join("/usr", "bin") -> "/usr/bin"
Time complexity: O(n).
.TP
.B clibx_bool path_exists(str path)
Check if a file or directory exists at the given path.
Returns non-zero if exists, zero otherwise.
Time complexity: O(1) on most systems.
.TP
.B clibx_bool path_is_dir(str path)
Check if a path is a directory.
Returns non-zero if true, zero otherwise.
Time complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B clibx_bool path_is_file(str path)
Check if a path is a regular file.
Returns non-zero if true, zero otherwise.
Time complexity: O(1).
.TP
.B long path_file_size(str path)
Get the size in bytes of a file.
Returns file size on success, -1 on error.
Time complexity: O(1).
.SH LOGGING & ERROR HANDLING
.TP
.B void LOG(fmt, ...)
Print a colored log message to stderr with [LOG] prefix in yellow.
Format specifiers: same as printf.
Prints to stderr, exits with EXIT_FAILURE on write failure.
.TP
.B void ERROR(fmt, ...)
Print an error message to stderr with [ERROR] prefix in red, including file and line number.
Format specifiers: same as printf.
Calls exit(EXIT_FAILURE) immediately.
.TP
.B void ASSERT(cond, msg)
Runtime assertion. If condition is false, calls ERROR with the given message.
If condition is true, does nothing.
.TP
.B void UNIMPLEMENTED(void)
Macro that calls ERROR indicating code path is not yet implemented.
Useful for marking stub functions.
.TP
.B void UNREACHABLE(void)
Macro that calls ERROR indicating code path should never be reached.
Useful in default branches of exhaustive switch statements.
.SH TYPE INTROSPECTION
.TP
.B str TYPE_STR(x)
Return a string representation of a type for common built-in types.
Supported: int, long, float, double, char, and others.
Uses _Generic for compile-time type dispatch.
.TP
.B TYPE_NAME(x)
Macro (GCC/Clang only) that returns the type of x using __typeof__.
Useful for creating variables with the same type as another variable.
.TP
.B str TYPE_FUNC(x)
Return the pretty function signature for debugging (GCC/Clang only).
On other compilers, returns "<TYPE_FUNC unavailable: requires GCC/Clang>".
.TP
.B void PRINT(x)
Print a variable to stdout with automatic newline.
Supports: int, long, float, double, char, char*.
Uses _Generic to select the appropriate format specifier.
.SH COMPILER HINTS (GCC/CLANG)
.TP
.B int LIKELY(x)
Branch prediction hint indicating the expression is likely true.
On non-GCC/Clang compilers, this is a no-op.
.TP
.B int UNLIKELY(x)
Branch prediction hint indicating the expression is likely false.
On non-GCC/Clang compilers, this is a no-op.
.TP
.B void UNUSED(x)
Suppress compiler warnings about unused variables.
On all compilers, casts the expression to void.
.TP
.B DEPRECATED
Function attribute (GCC/Clang) that marks a function as deprecated.
Compiler will warn when the function is used.
Example: void old_func(void) DEPRECATED;
.TP
.B NODISCARD
Function attribute (GCC/Clang) that warns if the return value is ignored.
Useful for functions whose return value should not be ignored.
Example: NODISCARD int might_fail(void);
.SH LOOP HELPERS
.TP
.B for FOR(i, n)
Macro that expands to: for (size_t i = 0; i < n; i++)
Convenient loop from 0 to n-1.
.TP
.B for FOR_RANGE(i, start, end)
Macro that expands to: for (size_t i = start; i < end; i++)
Convenient loop from start to end-1.
.SH BOOLEAN SUPPORT
In C99 and later, use standard bool from <stdbool.h>.
For pre-C99 code, clibx provides:
.TP
.B clibx_bool
Integer type for boolean values (int).
.TP
.B clibx_true
Constant with value 1 (true).
.TP
.B clibx_false
Constant with value 0 (false).
.TP
.B void CLIBX_PRINT_BOOL(b)
Macro that prints a boolean value as "true" or "false" to stdout.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
#include <clibx.h>

int main(void) {
    // Array operations
    int arr[] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
    print_int_array(arr, ARRAY_SIZE(arr));

    // Math operations
    int min = MIN(10, 20);
    int max = MAX(10, 20);

    // Memory allocation
    int *ptr = NEW(int);
    *ptr = 42;
    FREE(ptr);

    // String operations
    str text = "  hello world  ";
    str trimmed = strtrim(text);
    printf("Trimmed: '%s'\n", trimmed);
    FREE(trimmed);

    // Logging
    LOG("Application started");
    if (ptr == NULL)
        ERROR("Pointer is NULL");

    return 0;
}
.fi
.SH COMPILATION
Compile:
.nf
gcc myprogram.c -o myprogram
.fi
.SH PORTABILITY NOTES
.TP
.B GCC/Clang Only Features
SWAP, LIKELY, UNLIKELY, DEPRECATED, NODISCARD, TYPE_NAME, TYPE_FUNC
provide portable no-op fallbacks on other compilers.
.TP
.B POSIX Features
Path utilities require POSIX functions (access, stat, basename, dirname)
and work on Unix-like systems (Linux, macOS, BSD).
.TP
.B Boolean Support
If <stdbool.h> is not available, clibx_bool, clibx_true, clibx_false
are provided. Use clibx_bool for boolean values in pre-C99 code.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR clibx_list (3),
.BR clibx_print (3)
.SH AUTHOR
DavidBalishyan <davidbalishyan12@gmail.com>
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the project repository.
.SH LICENSE
See LICENSE file in the project root.
